City of Edmonton Historic Resource Management Program

DR. TERWILLIGAR'S
RESIDENCE
10727 - 125 STREET
Description of Historic Place
The Dr. Terwillegar Residence is a one
and one-half storey Craftsman
Bungalow style house, with a lowpitched hipped roof and shingle siding.
It is located on a quiet residential street,
in a mid-block location near the
commercial area of 124 Street and
107 Avenue, in the historic Westmount
neighbourhood in west Edmonton.
Historic Value
The Dr. Terwillegar Residence has
heritage value for its association with
prominent local citizen Dr. Norman
Terwillegar, for its Craftsman Bungalow
style architecture, for its association
with architect John Martland and for
its location within the historic
neighbourhood context of
Westmount.
The Dr. Terwillegar Residence has
heritage value for its association with
Dr. Norman Terwillegar (1884-1948),
a prominent local citizen. Terwillegar
was initially a resident doctor and later
a staff member at the Royal Alexandra
Hospital, while maintaining his own
private medical practice for thirty-five
years. He also served as President of
the Edmonton Academy of Medicine
and President of the Alberta Medical
Society. He was commemorated in
1962 by the naming of Terwillegar
Heights in honour of his service to the
city. Terwillegar practiced from this
residence in the latter years of his
career, still evident in the house’s intact
original interior layout. The Terwillegar
family owned the house from 1920
to 1959.
Built in 1913, the Dr. Terwillegar
Residence is valued as a fine example
of a Craftsman Bungalow in
Edmonton. The Craftsman style was
the dominant style for smaller houses

between 1910 and 1930, notable for
its extensive use of wood, restrained
craftsmanship and open eaves.
Craftsman style houses with hipped
roofs are less common than gable
roofs, marking this as an unusual
variation on the style in Edmonton.
It was designed by architect John
Martland, who, in partnership with
David Hardie, designed such
Edmonton landmarks as Sacred Heart
Catholic Church (1913) and the Hecla
Block (1914). Martland became the
municipal architect for the City of
Edmonton in 1919, a position he
held for eighteen years, and president
of the Alberta Association of
Architects.
The Dr. Terwillegar Residence is
physical evidence of the development
of the neighbourhood of Westmount,
as a result of frantic real estate
speculation that occurred in
Edmonton immediately prior to WWI.
The Dr. Terwillegar Residence helps
to reinforce the historic continuity
and character of the historic area,
while being unique due to its lowprofile massing, among other larger,
mainly two-storey residences. The
area was a less pretentious, but
elegant northern extension of the
Glenora neighbourhood and contains
one of the greatest concentrations of
pre-WWI single-family dwellings in
Edmonton. The Westmount
Architectural Heritage Area was
established in 1983 to recognize the
distinct architectural character of the
Westmount neighourhood, reflecting
Edmonton's commitment to its
architectural history.

Character Defining Elements
Key elements that define the heritage
character of the Dr. Terwillegar
Residence include its:
- mid-block location on a quiet
residential street;
- residential form, scale and massing
such as its one and one-half storey
plus basement height and irregular
rectangular plan, with front porch
and rear wing gable roof extensions;
- low-pitched hipped roof with slightly
flared eaves and hipped dormer in
the front and rear;
- wood-frame construction, with cedar
shingle siding with a slight bellcast;
- Craftsman Bungalow style features
such as its extensive use of wood
elements, low-pitched roof, exposed
rafter tails, wide, open eaves, simple
frieze board, and simple wood
window surrounds;
- additional exterior features such as
its enclosed front porch;
- regular fenestration: front bay
window with wood sash windows
with straight-leaded upper sash,
multi-paned windows with transoms
enclosing the front porch, double
assembly 1-over-1 double-hung
wood sash windows in the dormers,
and other single and double
assembly wood-sash windows; and
- interior features such as its original
spatial layout; original kitchen
cabinetry; door crowns and
mouldings; baseboard mouldings;
wood floors; original paneled doors
and hardware; and millwork room
divider with tapered columns
between the living and dining
rooms.

